Specify child devices configuration management (#1417)
thin-edge/thin-edge.io: docs/src/references/c8y-configuration-management.md

  Behind the scene, the behavior is a bit more complex,
  the configuration plugin acting as a proxy between the cloud and the child-devices.
  The configuration updates are downloaded from the cloud on the thin-edge device
  then made available to the child-devices over HTTP,
  MQTT being used to notify the availability of these configuration updates.
  The child-device software has to subscribe to these messages, download the corresponding updates,
  and notify the main thin-edge configuration plugin of the update status.
  A similar combination of MQTT and HTTP is used to let the main device
  request a child device for a configuration file actually in use.
* In other words, the responsibilities of the plugin are:
  * to define the list of files under configuration management
  * to notify the cloud when this list is updated,
  * to upload these files to the cloud on demand,  
  * to download the files pushed from the cloud,
  * to make sure that the target files are updated atomically after successful download,
  * to notify the device software when the configuration is updated,
  * to act as proxy for the child-devices that need configuration management,

>   * to publish over a local HTTP server the configuration files made available to the child-devices,

Author: Indeed, clearer => changed.

  * to notify the child-devices when configuration updates are available,
  * to notify the child-devices when current configuration files are requested from the cloud,
  * to consume over a local HTTP server the configuration files pushed by the child-devices.
* By contrast, the plugin is not responsible for:
  * checking the uploaded files are well-formed,
  * restarting the configured processes,
  * installing the configuration files on the child-devices.
* For each child-device, a device-specific software component is required
  to listen for configuration related MQTT notification

>   and behave accordingly along the protocol define by this configuration plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  and behave accordingly along the protocol defined by this configuration plugin.
```

Author: Fixed

-rw-r--r-- 1 tedge tedge 97 Mar 22 14:24 /etc/tedge/operations/c8y/c8y_DownloadConfigFile
```

The configuration plugin can also act as configuration proxy for child-devices.
For that to work for a child device named `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID`,
two files must be added under `/etc/tedge/operations/c8y/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID`
in order to declare the associated capabilities to Cumulocity.

These two files can be created using the `c8y_configuration_plugin --init` option and providing child names:

```shell

> $ sudo c8y_configuration_plugin --init child-1 child-2
> 
> $ ls -l /etc/tedge/operations/c8y/child-1/c8y_UploadConfigFile
> -rw-r--r-- 1 tedge tedge 95 Mar 22 14:24 /etc/tedge/operations/c8y/child-1/c8y_UploadConfigFile
>   
> $ ls -l /etc/tedge/operations/c8y/child-1/c8y_DownloadConfigFile
> -rw-r--r-- 1 tedge tedge 97 Mar 22 14:24 /etc/tedge/operations/c8y/child-1/c8y_DownloadConfigFile

Reviewer 2: I have a bit better proposal (because @initard got confused at his first look)

```suggestion
$ sudo c8y_configuration_plugin --init child-1 child-2

$ ls -l /etc/tedge/operations/c8y/child-1
-rw-r--r-- 1 tedge tedge 97 Mar 22 14:24 /etc/tedge/operations/c8y/child-1/c8y_DownloadConfigFile
-rw-r--r-- 1 tedge tedge 95 Mar 22 14:24 /etc/tedge/operations/c8y/child-1/c8y_UploadConfigFile
  
$ ls -l /etc/tedge/operations/c8y/child-2
-rw-r--r-- 1 tedge tedge 97 Mar 22 14:24 /etc/tedge/operations/c8y/child-2/c8y_DownloadConfigFile
-rw-r--r-- 1 tedge tedge 95 Mar 22 14:24 /etc/tedge/operations/c8y/child-2/c8y_UploadConfigFile
```

Author: Indeed better. I will fix it.

Reviewer 2: Probably, also better to mention `/etc/tedge/operations/c8y/child-1` is owned by `tedge:tedge`.

Author: Done

```

> 

Reviewer 3: Question, does this `--init child-1 child-2` also create toml files for them in `etc/tedge/c8y/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml`?

Author: No. The `c8y-configuration-plugin.toml` files are to be provided by the child-devices themselves.

Reviewer 2: The steps how the thin-edge device will get the `c8y-configuration-plugin.toml` from the child device need to be clearly documented. It's the missing part in our prototype implementation. File transfer? MQTT message from child-device and c8y_configuration_plugin converts it to a file as proposed by @cstoidner [here](https://github.com/thin-edge/thin-edge.io/pull/1236/files?short_path=0d43010#diff-0d430102a9a7f4e4431390a85806a990b51d2143dbc97bf596a267c893e1f693)?

Author: Indeed, this is a critical missing point. I still need to describe it. However, the idea I have in mind differs from what is proposed by Christoph. Why use MQTT for this configuration file when the child devices send all the other configuration files over HTTP? Why use JSON for this configuration file over the network while it's stored as TOML?

Furthermore, a key design idea for the `c8y_configuration_plugin` is to have this plugin freely configured from the cloud using the same mechanism as for all the other configuration files. We need to follow the same pattern here, i.e. the `c8y-configuration-plugin.toml` for a child device must be configurable from the cloud. So the content for this file will flow as the others from the cloud to the child-device via the main thin-edge device. In this very specific case, the configuration plugin will not only act as a proxy, it will also take a copy of this configuration for the child device. 

What is not clear yet for me, is when the very first version is uploaded from the child device to the main thin-edge device.
This can be done on request from by the main device or at start of the child device

Author: > The steps how the thin-edge device will get the c8y-configuration-plugin.toml from the child device need to be clearly documented. It's the missing part in our prototype implementation. 

Here is my proposal https://github.com/thin-edge/thin-edge.io/pull/1417/commits/a4bb877926ea7e0ae931f4c63b6a9bf9c27bb645

The `c8y_configuration_plugin` has to be run as a daemon on the device, the latter being connected to Cumulocity.

On start of `tegde_mapper c8y` and on `/etc/tedge/operations/c8y` directory updates,
one can observe on the MQTT bus of the thin-edge device
the messages sent to Cumulocity to declare the capabilities of the main and child devices.
Here, the capabilities to upload and download configuration files
(possibly with other capabilities added independently):

```shell
$ tedge mqtt sub 'c8y/s/ds/#'
[c8y/s/ds] 114,c8y_Restart,c8y_SoftwareList,c8y_UploadConfigFile,c8y_DownloadConfigFile
[c8y/s/ds/child-1] 114,c8y_UploadConfigFile,c8y_DownloadConfigFile

> [c8y/s/ds/child-2] 114,c8y_UploadConfigFile,c8y_DownloadConfigFile

Reviewer 2: `c8y/s/ds` is the topic which a device receives a smartrest message from Cumulocity. Isn't it `c8y/s/us`? I think these message direction is from thin-edge device to Cumulocity.

Author: I might be wrong. I will double-check and fix it.

Author: I was wrong => fixed

-rw-r--r-- 1 tedge tedge 97 Mar 22 14:24 /etc/tedge/operations/c8y/c8y_DownloadConfigFile
```

The configuration plugin can also act as configuration proxy for child-devices.

> For that to work for a child device named `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID`,
> two files must be added under `/etc/tedge/operations/c8y/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID`
> in order to declare the associated capabilities to Cumulocity.
> These files are just empty files owned by the `tedge` user.

Reviewer: Long sentence, and why do you explain here things, that you not explained for the main-device (e.g. about `tedge` user)?

Why not just like that:

```suggestion
Same as for the main-device, those two files must be created for a child-device, but with the `child-id` as subfolder.
```

> These two files can be created using the `c8y_configuration_plugin --init` option and providing child names:

Author: Indeed, this is a short term solution. This has the drawback of requesting a direct access to the main thin-edge device;
but, at least, this is aligned with the current behavior of the `c8y_configuration_plugin` for the main device.

> These two files can be created using the `c8y_configuration_plugin --init` option and providing child names:

Author: This has been reverted.

$ ls /etc/tedge/c8y/*/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml
/etc/tedge/c8y/child-1/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml 
/etc/tedge/c8y/child-2/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml

$ cat /etc/tedge/c8y/child-1/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml
files = [
    { path = '/var/camera.conf', type = 'camera' },
    { path = '/var/sounds.conf', type = 'sounds' },
  ]

$ cat /etc/tedge/c8y/child-2/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml
files = [
    { path = '/var/ai/model' },
  ]
```

On start and when one of these files is updated, the configuration plugin sends
one [`119 SmartRest2 message`](https://cumulocity.com/guides/10.14.0/reference/smartrest-two/#119) per device
to Cumulocity with the set of `type`s listed by the configuration
(adding implicitly the `c8y-configuration-plugin` themselves).
These messages can be observed over the MQTT bus of the thin-edge device.
In the case of the example, 3 messages are sent - one for the main device and 2 for the child devices:

```shell
$ tedge mqtt sub 'c8y/s/ds/#'
[c8y/s/ds] 119,c8y-configuration-plugin,tedge.toml,/etc/tedge/mosquitto-conf/c8y-bridge.conf,/etc/tedge/mosquitto-conf/tedge-mosquitto.conf,mosquitto
[c8y/s/ds/child-1] 119,c8y-configuration-plugin,camera,sounds

> [c8y/s/ds/child-2] 119,c8y-configuration-plugin,/var/ai/model

Reviewer 2: Same here. `c8y/s/us` should be correct.

Author: I will double-check.

Author: I was wrong => fixed

  ]
```

Along this `c8y_configuration_plugin` configuration for the main device,

> the configuration plugin expect a configuration file per child device

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the configuration plugin expects a configuration file per child device
```

Author: fixed

that needs to be configured from the cloud.
* The configuration for a child-device `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID`
  is stored by default under `/etc/tedge/c8y/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml`
* These TOML files have the same schema as for the main device,
  listing the configuration `files` and giving for each a `path` and possibly a `type`.
* Note that the `path` doesn't need to be a file path.
  It can be a key path in some registry of the child device or any name that makes sense for the child device.
* As for the main device, the `type` is used to name the configuration file on the cloud.
  All the configuration `type`s for a child devices are declared to the cloud on start
  and on change of the `c8y/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml` file.
* The `user`, `group` and `mode` can be provided for a child-device configuration file

>   but will not be used by the main device if provided.   

Reviewer: For what reason should a user provide those? Are they sent/provided to the child-device? A short hint would help here.

Author: The motivation is to let the child-device send its configuration file unchanged to the main device. I agree this is not clear.

I slightly change the working.

  ]
```

Along this `c8y_configuration_plugin` configuration for the main device,
the configuration plugin expects a configuration file per child device
that needs to be configured from the cloud.
* The configuration for a child-device `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID`
  is stored by default under `/etc/tedge/c8y/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml`
* These TOML files have the same schema as for the main device,
  listing the configuration `files` and giving for each a `path` and possibly a `type`.
* Note that the `path` doesn't need to be a file path.

>   It can be a key path in some registry of the child device or any name that makes sense for the child device.

Author: I see your point of view. However, what matters most for me is consistency between the main and the child device configuration. The same terms should be applied for both.

>   It can be a key path in some registry of the child device or any name that makes sense for the child device.

Reviewer 4: Yes, I completely agree on that need for consistency. So, my proposal would be to make `type` (or whatever else we wanna call it) as the mandatory field for parent and child devices and let `path` be an optional parameter that's just valid for file-based configurations just like `group`, 'owner` and `mode` fields are.

Making `type` as the mandatory field would be better for the parent thin-edge device as well when we'd want to support non-file-based configurations on it, like the configuration of a docker container running on that device. Many of our customers have software running on thin-edge device as containers and they'd want to do config management on them as well. So, we'll need something more than just `path` to support that.

But, this comes at the cost of breaking backward compatibility. But as a 0.x release, I'm not too bothered about that if that change is sustainable in the long-term.

        --config-dir <CONFIG_DIR>      [default: /etc/tedge]
        --debug                        Turn-on the debug log level
    -h, --help                         Print help information

>     -i, --init [CHILD]                 Create supported operation files, possibly for several child devices

Reviewer: What is "CHILD"? It is the child-id, or as you used before in the document $CHILD_DEVICE_ID.

Author: Updated

        --config-dir <CONFIG_DIR>      [default: /etc/tedge]
        --debug                        Turn-on the debug log level
    -h, --help                         Print help information

>     -i, --init [CHILD_DEVICE_ID]       Create supported operation files, possibly for several child devices

Author: This will have to be adjusted to the actual help generated by `snap`.

>     -i, --init [CHILD_DEVICE_ID]       Create supported operation files, possibly for several child devices

Author: This has been reverted.

* Since the type of configuration file is used as an MQTT topic name, the characters `#` and `+` cannot be used in a type name.
  If such a character is used in a type name (or in the path of a configuration file without explicit type),
  then the whole plugin configuration `/etc/tedge/c8y/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml` is considered ill-formed.

## Configuration protocol between thin-edge and the child-devices

The configuration plugin `c8y_configuration_plugin` can act as a proxy between the cloud and a child-device.

> However, for that to work, a client must be installed on the child device
> to perform the actual configuration updates pushed from the cloud.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, for that to work, a client must be installed on the child device
to perform the actual configuration updates pushed from the cloud via the thin-edge device.
```

Author: Changed to "pushed by thin-edge on behalf of the cloud".

> While the configuration plugin tells what need to be updated and when,
> only the device specific client can control where and how these updates can be applied.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While the configuration plugin tells what need to be updated and when,
only the child device specific client can control where and how these updates can be applied.
```

Author: Added.

* The responsibility of the configuration plugin is to
  * interact with the cloud, receiving the configuration updates and requests,
  * publish and collect configuration files via an HTTP-based file transfer service over the local network,

>   * notify the child devices vi MQTT when configuration files are to be updated or requested from the cloud,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * notify the child devices via MQTT when configuration files are to be updated or requested from the cloud,
```

  * listen for child devices MQTT configuration status messages.
* The child-device specific software is an MQTT+HTTP client that
  * interact with the child-device system, updating and requesting the target configuration files
  * connect the main thin-edge device over the local MQTT bus,
  * listen over MQTT for configuration updates and requests,
  * download and upload on demand the configuration files,
  * notify the progress of the configuration updates to the main device via MQTT.

For each kind of child device such a specific client has to be implemented and installed,
most often on the child-device hardware but not necessarily as one can imagine a process running

> thin-edge and acting as a proxy for a child device which software cannot be altered.

Author: The point is about devices which software can not changed to implement the thin-edge specific protocol.
In such a case, one can implement a program that translate thin-edge MQTT + HTTP requests into the protocol that is natively supported by the device. This program can then be installed in the main thin-edge device.

I updated the comment, but if still not clear or confusing, I can consider to remove it.

Here is the protocol that have to be implemented by child-device configuration client.
This protocol covers 3 interactions:
* Receiving configuration file updates from thin-edge
* Sending to thin-edge current configuration files

> * Notifying the list of configuration files to thin-edge

Author: I would not add details about HTTP request here. For several reasons:

* This is about complete interactions (sequence of steps to reach a goal as "the child device config has been updated") and not just one step ("the child device downloads the configuration file").
* Each interaction combines several requests and responses over two protocols (MQTT and HTTP).
* This list is only an outline, the details are given by the following subsection.

> Where is DELETE?

This is a low level step, managed by the `c8y_configuration_plugin` once a transfer has been successful
Once the child device confirms the configuration have been updated, for "Receiving new configuration files"
Once the cloud confirms the configuration have been received, for "Sending current configuration files"

### The child device connect the main thin-edge device

From a TCP point of view, the child devices act as clients
and all the connections to thin-edge are established by the child devices.
* Thin-edge opens two ports for MQTT and HTTP over the local network.
  These ports are controlled on the main device `tedge config`:
  * `mqtt.external.bind_address`
  * `mqtt.external.port`
  * `http.external.port`
* The child devices must know the main device IP address.
  * This is the address set for `mqtt.external.bind_address` on the main device.
  * For the very specific case, where the software for the child device run on the main device,
    this connection address can be the `localhost`.
* On start, the child-device specific software for configuration management,

>   must connect over MQTT to thin-edge.

Author: added

  * It must use a session name that is unique on the thin-edge bus.
    `"$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/configuration"` is the recommendation.
  * It must subscribe to `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/req/#` to receive requests.
  * It has to publish responses under `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/res/#`.
* On demand, the child-device software has to send HTTP requests to thin-edge.
  * These requests are REST requests (GET/PUT/DELETE) to exchange files.

>   * The urls are forged by thin-edge telling the child devices

Author: Let unchanged. I find this clear enough but I'm okay to be explicit if this helps. 

The urls are forged by the configuration plugin running on the thin-edge device.

and notifies the cloud on the progress of this configuration update operation.

1. On reception of a configuration update for a child device named `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID`
   of a file `{ path = $PATH, type = $TYPE }`defined in `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml` 
   the `c8y_configuration_plugin` downloads the new configuration content in `/tmp`,
   and, on success, moves this content under the thin-edge file transfer HTTP root.
   * The file is moved to `$TEDGE_HTTP_ROOT/config_snapshot/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/$TYPE`
     making this file available under `http://$TEDGE_HTTP/tedge/config_snapshot/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/$TYPE`.
   * Note that the `$TYPE` is by default the `$PATH` if not provided by the configuration.  
1. Once the updated configuration is available over the local HTTP file transfer service,
   the `c8y_configuration_plugin` notify the child device by publishing an MQTT message.
   * The topic is `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/req/config_update`
   * The payload is a JSON record with 3 fields
     * `"url": "http://$TEDGE_HTTP/tedge/config_snapshot/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/$PATH"`
     * `"path": "$PATH"`

>      * `"type": "$TYPE"`

Author: I would send no "type" field then. => updated

1. On reception of a configuration update on the topic `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/req/config_update`,
   The child-device specific software for configuration management:
   1. Downloads the content from the `url` specified by the notification message.
   1. Uses the `path` and `type` information to apply the new configuration content.
      Note that these pieces of information are provided by the child-device specific software itself,
      and make sense only in the specific context of the device operating system and software.
1. While the configuration update is applied,
   the child-device specific software for configuration management,

>    notifies thin-edge over MQTT about the progress of this operation.

Author: Left unchanged

   1. These messages are published on the topic
      `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/res/config_update`/<config file path>`
   1. There is three different payloads to notify the configuration operation started,

>       finally succeed or failed for some reason.

Author: removed

   1. All these payloads are JSON records with 3 required fields:

>       * `"status": "$STATUS"` where the status is either "EXECUTING", "SUCCESS" or "ERROR"

Reviewer 3: should the status be aligned with tedge agent for software management?  If so they should be lowercase and as follows:

```suggestion
      * `"status": "$STATUS"` where the status is either "executing", "successful" or "failed"
```

Author: Must be aligned. Yes. => Updated.

      * `"path": "$PATH"`
      * `"type": "$TYPE"`

>       * `"error": "$ERROR_MSG"` telling the cause of the error if any.

Reviewer 3: also to align with software management, error should be "reason"
```suggestion
      * `"reason": "$ERROR_MSG"` telling the cause of the error if any.
```

Author: => Updated

   1. The child-device configuration software must send at least a success or an error message.
      It should send an executing message.
1. On reception an operation status message,
   the `c8y_configuration_plugin` notifies the cloud accordingly.
   1. When a success or error message is finally received,
      then the configuration plugin cleans up all the temporary resources,

>       notably removing the file under `$TEDGE_HTTP_ROOT/config_snapshot/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/$TYPE`.

Reviewer 3: So does this mean both:
1. DELETE HTTP request
2. remove files downloaded in /tmp?

This is a case for having the file moved from /tmp to the  TEDGE_HTTP_ROOT at the start. So that we do not worry about it in this step.

Author: I propose to use a `mv` from `/tmp` at the start. And a `rm` at the end. With no call the `HTTP DELETE`.

   1. If no responses are received from the child devices after 60s,
      then a timeout error is sent to the cloud, and the resources cleaned.

>    1. If a notification message is received for a configuration file that is not under update
>       this message is ignored.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1. If a notification message is received for a configuration file that is not under update topic
      this message is ignored.
```

Author: I have to improve the wording as you suggestion highlights a confusion.

The point is about "what if the `c8y_configuration_plugin` receives a notification, say `{ "path":"foo", "status": "success"}`,
while the plugin were *not* waiting a notification for this path?". This might arrive after a timeout.

* On demand, the child-device software has to send HTTP requests to thin-edge.
  * These requests are REST requests (GET/PUT/DELETE) to exchange files.
  * The urls are forged by thin-edge telling the child devices
    where to get and put configuration files.
* Currently, all these connections are done without TLS support.
  * Hence, the main device must be configured so these MQTT and HTTP ports
    are only open on a local trusted network.

### The child device downloads configuration updates on notification

When a configuration file for a child device
is received from the cloud by the `c8y_configuration_plugin` daemon,
the configuration plugin manages the transfer of this file to the child device
and notifies the cloud on the progress of this configuration update operation.

1. On reception of a configuration update for a child device named `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID`
   of a file `{ path = $PATH, type = $TYPE }`defined in `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml` 
   the `c8y_configuration_plugin` downloads the new configuration content in `/tmp`,
   and, on success, moves this content under the thin-edge file transfer HTTP root.

>    * The file is moved to `$TEDGE_HTTP_ROOT/config_snapshot/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/$TYPE`

Reviewer 2: Two things.
1. I believe that we use `config_snapshot` for `c8y_UploadConfigFile` (upload a snapshot to c8y), and `config_update` for `c8y_DownloadConfigFile` (deploying a snapshot to device). So, here should be `config_update` instead of `config_snapshot`. The implementation of our prototype and tedge_agent enhancement by @initard is distinguish them like that. (Note: The proposal from @cstoidner is mixed on that point, I guess it's mistake. [here](https://github.com/thin-edge/thin-edge.io/pull/1236/files?short_path=0d43010#diff-0d430102a9a7f4e4431390a85806a990b51d2143dbc97bf596a267c893e1f693))
2. The order of `config_snapshot/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID`. The prototype and tedge_agent has the oppisite order, e.g.
`/var/tedge/file-transfer/<child_device_id>/config_snapshot/<type>`. Which one should be?

```suggestion
   * The file is moved to `$TEDGE_HTTP_ROOT/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_update/$TYPE`
```

Author: 1. You are correct => fixed
2. There is no reason to change what has been done so far => updated

>      making this file available under `http://$TEDGE_HTTP/tedge/config_snapshot/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/$TYPE`.

Reviewer 2: The same reason as above, I would make this suggestion.

```suggestion
     making this file available under `http://$TEDGE_HTTP/tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_update/$TYPE`.
```

Author: fixed

   * Note that the `$TYPE` is by default the `$PATH` if not provided by the configuration.  
1. Once the updated configuration is available over the local HTTP file transfer service,
   the `c8y_configuration_plugin` notify the child device by publishing an MQTT message.
   * The topic is `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/req/config_update`
   * The payload is a JSON record with 3 fields

>      * `"url": "http://$TEDGE_HTTP/tedge/config_snapshot/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/$PATH"`

Reviewer 2: Same as above.

```suggestion
     * `"url": "http://$TEDGE_HTTP/tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_update/$PATH"`
```

Author: fixed

     * `"path": "$PATH"`
     * `"type": "$TYPE"` (if no `type` has been specified, then this field is omitted)
1. On reception of a configuration update on the topic `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/req/config_update`,
   The child-device specific software for configuration management:
   1. Downloads the content from the `url` specified by the notification message.
   1. Uses the `path` and `type` information to apply the new configuration content.
      Note that these pieces of information are provided by the child-device specific software itself,
      and make sense only in the specific context of the device operating system and software.
1. While the configuration update is applied,
   the child-device specific software for configuration management,
   notifies thin-edge over MQTT about the progress of this operation.
   1. These messages are published on the topic

>       `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/res/config_update`/<config file path>`

Reviewer 2: Format broken.
```suggestion
      `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/res/config_update/<config file path>`
```

Reviewer 2: Oh wait, do we really need the last `<config file path>`? I would omit it, and make the topic `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/res/config_update`. Two reasons:
1. `type` and `path` will be send by payload.
2. I checked how tedge_agent sends status message to mapper. [Here](https://github.com/thin-edge/thin-edge.io-specs/blob/main/src/software-management/sm-agent.md#thin-edge-json-software-update-response). The topic is `tedge/commands/res/software/update`. Without `<config file path>, it look more aligned with our existing schema.

Author: Oops. You are correct and it was my intent. I will fix that.

Author: Fixed

   1. There is three different payloads to notify the configuration operation started,
      succeed or failed for some reason.
   1. All these payloads are JSON records with 3 required fields:

>       * `"status": "$STATUS"` where the status is either "executing", "success" or "error"

Reviewer 2: Still the status is not aligned with software management.
```suggestion
      * `"status": "$STATUS"` where the status is either "executing", "successful" or "failed"
```

Author: I will fix that.

Author: Fixed

When a configuration file for a child device
is received from the cloud by the `c8y_configuration_plugin` daemon,
the configuration plugin manages the transfer of this file to the child device
and notifies the cloud on the progress of this configuration update operation.

1. On reception of a configuration update for a child device named `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID`
   of a file `{ path = $PATH, type = $TYPE }` defined in `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml` 
   the `c8y_configuration_plugin` downloads the new configuration content in `/tmp`,
   and, on success, moves this content under the thin-edge file transfer HTTP root.
   * The file is moved to `$TEDGE_HTTP_ROOT/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_update/$TYPE`
     making this file available under `http://$TEDGE_HTTP/tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_update/$TYPE`.
   * Note that the `$TYPE` is by default the `$PATH` if not provided by the configuration.  
1. Once the updated configuration is available over the local HTTP file transfer service,
   the `c8y_configuration_plugin` notify the child device by publishing an MQTT message.
   * The topic is `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/req/config_update`

>    * The payload is a JSON record with 3 fields
>      * `"url": "http://$TEDGE_HTTP/tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_update/$TYPE"`
>      * `"path": "$PATH"`
>      * `"type": "$TYPE"` (if no `type` has been specified, then this field is omitted)

Reviewer 3: If no "$TYPE" is specified, then the "url" line cannot be defined as described above.

Should it say  $PATH  instead?

```suggestion
   * The payload is a JSON record with 3 fields
     * `"url": "http://$TEDGE_HTTP/tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_update/$PATH"`
     * `"path": "$PATH"`
     * `"type": "$TYPE"` (if no `type` has been specified, then this field is omitted)
```

Author: When the `type` is not given explicitly one have to use the `path` instead. Giving the user to option of a `type` that is not the `path` can help when the actual path contains characters that are not easy to handle in an HTTP url or an MQTT topic.

Reviewer 2: I think we just need one note there, if $TYPE is not given, use $PATH in the `url`.

  then the whole plugin configuration `/etc/tedge/c8y/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml` is considered ill-formed.

## Configuration protocol between thin-edge and the child-devices

The configuration plugin `c8y_configuration_plugin` can act as a proxy between the cloud and a child-device.
However, for that to work, a client must be installed on the child device
to perform the actual configuration updates pushed by thin-edge on behalf of the cloud.
While the configuration plugin tells what need to be updated and when,
only the child device specific client can control where and how these updates can be applied.

* The responsibility of the configuration plugin is to
  * interact with the cloud, receiving the configuration updates and requests,
  * publish and collect configuration files via an HTTP-based file transfer service over the local network,
  * notify the child devices via MQTT when configuration files are to be updated or requested from the cloud,
  * listen for child devices MQTT configuration status messages.
* The child-device specific software is an MQTT+HTTP client that

>   * interact with the child-device system, updating and requesting the target configuration files

Reviewer: The child-device will never request a configuration file. Maybe it downloads a file on demand.

Author: I will improve the working since I was not speaking about the child device requesting a configuration to the cloud or thin-edge. But the child-device configuration software that read / access the actual configuration on the child device.

>   * interact with the child-device system, updating and requesting the target configuration files

Reviewer: What exctaly do you mean with "**target** configuration files"?

Author: I mean the configuration *on* the child device. Updated to the "actual configuration files"

  * connect the main thin-edge device over the local MQTT bus,
  * listen over MQTT for configuration updates and requests,
  * download and upload on demand the configuration files,
  * notify the progress of the configuration updates to the main device via MQTT.

For each kind of child device such a specific client has to be implemented
and installed on the child-device hardware (To be precise, most often on the child device,
but not necessarily as, for a child device which software cannot be altered,

> one might have to install a protocol adaptor on the main device).

Reviewer: > (To be precise, most often on the child device,
but not necessarily as, for a child device which software cannot be altered,
one might have to install a protocol adaptor on the main device)

- Very long sentence and many commas
- Too heavy topic to mention it just as a side node in brackets

Author: I will consider to remove this. Or to add a picture. It's not clear for all where child device specific software is running.

> Here is the protocol that have to be implemented by child-device configuration client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is the protocol that has to be implemented by the child-device configuration client.
```

Author: Fixed

This protocol covers 3 interactions:
* Receiving configuration file updates from thin-edge

> * Sending to thin-edge current configuration files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Sending current configuration files to thin-edge
```

Author: fixed

  * `http.external.port`
* The child devices must know the main device IP address.
  * This is the address set for `mqtt.external.bind_address` on the main device.
  * For the very specific case, where the software for the child device run on the main device,
    this connection address can be the `localhost`.
* On start, the child-device specific software for configuration management,
  must connect over MQTT to thin-edge device.
  * It must use a session name that is unique on the thin-edge bus.
    `"$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/configuration"` is the recommendation.
  * It must subscribe to `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/req/#` to receive requests.
  * It has to publish responses under `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/res/#`.
* On demand, the child-device software has to send HTTP requests to thin-edge.
  * These requests are REST requests (GET/PUT/DELETE) to exchange files.
  * The urls are forged by thin-edge telling the child devices
    where to get and put configuration files.
* Currently, all these connections are done without TLS support.
  * Hence, the main device must be configured so these MQTT and HTTP ports
    are only open on a local trusted network.

> ### The child device downloads configuration updates on notification

Reviewer: Would be really good to have a figure that illustrates that much text (e.g. a sequence diagram).

Author: I will add a global diagram of the interaction between the cloud, the thin-edge component, and the child devices.
I don't plan to add sequence diagrams.

Author: Albin added diagram sequences.

Author: Albin added diagram sequences.

> ### The child device downloads configuration updates on notification

Author: Fixed along the suggestion

When a configuration file for a child device
is received from the cloud by the `c8y_configuration_plugin` daemon,
the configuration plugin manages the transfer of this file to the child device
and notifies the cloud on the progress of this configuration update operation.

1. On reception of a configuration update for a child device named `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID`

>    of a file `{ path = $PATH, type = $TYPE }` defined in `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml` 

Reviewer: To avoid breaking the flow of the document, would be better to put an example file `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml` onto the top of that section, that can be used/referenced in all cases (config upload, config download, config list).

>    the `c8y_configuration_plugin` downloads the new configuration content in `/tmp`,

Author: fixed

>    the `c8y_configuration_plugin` downloads the new configuration content in `/tmp`,

Author: fixed

   and, on success, moves this content under the thin-edge file transfer HTTP root.
   * The file is moved to `$TEDGE_HTTP_ROOT/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_update/$TYPE`
     making this file available under `http://$TEDGE_HTTP/tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_update/$TYPE`.
   * Note that the `$TYPE` is by default the `$PATH` if not provided by the configuration.  
1. Once the updated configuration is available over the local HTTP file transfer service,

>    the `c8y_configuration_plugin` notify the child device by publishing an MQTT message.

Author: fixed

   notifies thin-edge over MQTT about the progress of this operation.
   1. These messages are published on the topic
      `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/res/config_update`
   1. There is three different payloads to notify the configuration operation started,
      succeed or failed for some reason.
   1. All these payloads are JSON records with 3 required fields:
      * `"status": "$STATUS"` where the status is either "executing", "successful" or "failed"
      * `"path": "$PATH"`
      * `"type": "$TYPE"`
      * `"reason": "$ERROR_MSG"` telling the cause of the error if any.
   1. The child-device configuration software must send at least a success or an error message,
      depending on the success of the `GET` and configuration operations.
      It should also send an executing message before starting to process the request.
1. On reception an operation status message,
   the `c8y_configuration_plugin` notifies the cloud accordingly.
   1. When a success or error message is finally received,
      then the configuration plugin cleans up all the temporary resources,
      notably removing the file under `$TEDGE_HTTP_ROOT/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_update/$TYPE`.

>    1. If no responses are received from the child devices after 60s,

Reviewer: What excatly is the status-transision that timeout is relevant for?

- a) for the whole operation from incoming to end (i.E. from 1st notification to the child-device, till "successful" or "failed" to thin-edge)?
- b) or does each status change reset the timeout?
  - in that case, does a re-send of status "executing" also reset the timeout?

Intention of my comment: It should be possible to allow a child-device more than 60s to apply a configuration. In best case the child-device can tell thin-edge, that applying is still in progress (e.g. with re-sending "executing").

Author: I agree the current description is fuzzy. However, I prefer to defer the decision until implementation - to pick the simplest solution from the code perspective and adjusting the timeout if necessary. The correct timing doesn't matter. The point of this timeout is only to avoid blocking situation.

Author: Handling timeout will be implemented later: https://github.com/thin-edge/thin-edge.io/issues/1480.

>    1. If no responses are received from the child devices after 60s,

Author: I see no value to have this configurable. If there is a risk to have some slow devices, then let's hardcode 5 minutes.

>    1. If no responses are received from the child devices after 60s,

Reviewer: Ok, lets use the hardcoded long 5min timeout. 

We can extend it anytime later with a configuration option, if there is a reason.

      then a timeout error is sent to the cloud, and the resources cleaned.
   1. If a notification message is received while none is expected (this might notably arrive after a timeout),
      i.e with a configuration file `type` that doesn't exist under `TEDGE_HTTP_ROOT/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_update/`,
      then this notification message is ignored.

> ### The child device uploads current configurations on request

Reviewer: Would be really good to have a figure that illustrates that much text (e.g. a sequence diagram).

Author: I will add a global diagram of the interaction between the cloud, the thin-edge component, and the child devices.
I don't plan to add sequence diagrams.

       `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/res/config_snapshot`
    1. There is three different payloads to notify the configuration operation started,
       succeed or failed for some reason.
    1. All these payloads are JSON records with 3 required fields:
        * `"status": "$STATUS"` where the status is either "executing", "successful" or "failed"
        * `"path": "$PATH"`
        * `"type": "$TYPE"`
        * `"reason": "$ERROR_MSG"` telling the cause of the error if any.
    1. The child-device configuration software must send at least a success or an error message,
       depending on the success of the `PUT` operation.
       It should also send an executing message before starting to process the request.
1. On reception an operation status message,
   the `c8y_configuration_plugin` notifies the cloud accordingly.
    1. When a success message is received,
       then the configuration plugin transfers to the cloud the content `PUT` by the child-device
       under `$TEDGE_HTTP_ROOT/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_snapshop/$TYPE` and
       finally removes this file when acknowledged by the cloud.
    1. If no responses are received from the child devices after 60s,

>        then a timeout error is sent to the cloud.

Reviewer: Shouldn't also potential ressources in http root deleted?

    1. If a notification message is received while none is expected for this type of configuration
       (this might notably arrive after a timeout), then this notification message is ignored.
       
### The child device uploads its configuration file list on start and on change

The configuration files for a child device `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID` are defined by
the file `$TEDGE_CONFIG_DIR/c8y/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml`.
The content of this file is provided by the child-device configuration software

> but must be known by the `c8y_configuration_plugin`

Reviewer: It is not necessarily provided by the child-device. Why not allow a user to create that file manually, for child-device that cannot provided that information (same as for the main device)?

Author: What would prevent to have an admin this configuration file? What I meant here is that the `c8y-configuration-plugin`  is not defined on the main device but on the child device (or where is running the child device specific software if a proxy is required).

Reviewer: Ok, understood.

  * The urls are forged by thin-edge telling the child devices
    where to get and put configuration files.
* Currently, all these connections are done without TLS support.
  * Hence, the main device must be configured so these MQTT and HTTP ports
    are only open on a local trusted network.

### The child device downloads configuration updates on notification

When a configuration file for a child device
is received from the cloud by the `c8y_configuration_plugin` daemon,
the configuration plugin manages the transfer of this file to the child device
and notifies the cloud on the progress of this configuration update operation.

1. On reception of a configuration update for a child device named `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID`
   of a file `{ path = $PATH, type = $TYPE }` defined in `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml` 
   the `c8y_configuration_plugin` downloads the new configuration content to the temporary directory defined by `tedge config get tmp.path`,
   and, on success, moves this content under the thin-edge file transfer HTTP root.
   * The file is moved to `$TEDGE_HTTP_ROOT/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_update/$TYPE`

>      making this file available under `http://$TEDGE_HTTP/tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_update/$TYPE`.

Author: According tp the [file transfer specifications](https://github.com/thin-edge/thin-edge.io/pull/1361)

```suggestion
     making this file available under `http://$TEDGE_HTTP/tedge/file-transfer/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_update/$TYPE`.
```

the file `$TEDGE_CONFIG_DIR/c8y/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml` on the thin-edge device.
But, the content of this file must be provided by the child-device agent
by uploading a `c8y-configuration-plugin.toml` with `"type": "c8y-configuration-plugin"` in its prescribed format.

The child-device must upload this file on its startup as well as when updated,
as if it received a config snapshot request for `c8y-configuration-plugin` type as follows:

1. On start-up, the child-device uploads this file (as well as on update of this file list),
   as if it received a config snapshot request for `c8y-configuration-plugin` type:
      1. Generate a `c8y-configuration-plugin.toml` with the supported config list in the presribed format.
      2. Uploads this file to `http://$TEDGE_HTTP/tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_snapshot/c8y-configuration-plugin` with a `PUT` call.
      3. On success of the upload, the child-device agent
         notifies the `c8y_configuration_plugin` with an MQTT message published on the topic
         `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/res/config_snapshot`
         with the payload containing a JSON record with 2 required fields:

>         * `"status": "successful"`

Author: Here is an idea that might simplify a lot the code of the `c8y_configuration_plugin`.

```suggestion
        * `"status": "updated"`
```

By having the child-device sending a specific status for spontaneous snapshot, this helps the main device to figure out that nothing is expected from the cloud.

Reviewer 4: Instead of a new `status` value, we've decided to not have the `status` field for such spontaneous responses.

* Since the type of configuration file is used as an MQTT topic name, the characters `#` and `+` cannot be used in a type name.
  If such a character is used in a type name (or in the path of a configuration file without explicit type),
  then the whole plugin configuration `/etc/tedge/c8y/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml` is considered ill-formed.

## Configuration protocol between thin-edge and the child-devices

The configuration plugin `c8y_configuration_plugin` can act as a proxy between the cloud and a child-device.
However, for that to work, a client must be installed on the child device
to perform the actual configuration updates pushed by thin-edge on behalf of the cloud.
While the configuration plugin tells what need to be updated and when,
only the child device specific client can control where and how these updates can be applied.

* The responsibility of the configuration plugin is to

>   * interact with the cloud, receiving the configuration updates and requests,

Author: Updated

>   * publish and collect configuration files via an HTTP-based file transfer service over the local network,

Author: Updated

  * notify the child devices via MQTT when configuration files are to be updated or requested from the cloud,

>   * listen for child devices MQTT configuration status messages.

Author: Updated

* The child-device configuration software is an MQTT+HTTP client that
  * interact with the child-device system, accessing the actual configuration files
  * connect the main thin-edge device over the local MQTT bus,
  * listen over MQTT for configuration updates and requests,

>   * download and upload on demand the configuration files,

Author: Updated

>   * notify the progress of the configuration updates to the main device via MQTT.

Author: Updated

For each kind of child device such a specific client has to be implemented
and installed on the child-device hardware (To be precise, most often on the child device,
but not necessarily as, for a child device which software cannot be altered,
one might have to install a protocol adaptor on the main device).

Here is the protocol that has to be implemented by the child-device configuration client.
This protocol covers 4 interactions, the child devices:
1. Connecting to thin-edge

> 1. Receiving configuration file updates from thin-edge

Author: Updated

> 1. Sending current configuration files to thin-edge

Author: Updated

> 1. Notifying the list of configuration files to thin-edge

Author: Oops - you are correct this not aligned by the current spec. However, this can be the way to go. Hence, I postpone this comment till we agree on the correct approach.

> 1. Notifying the list of configuration files to thin-edge

Author: The retained proposal is to let the child device upload its configuration on start and on change.

> ### The child device connect the main thin-edge device

Author: Updated

and notifies the cloud on the progress of this configuration update operation.

1. On reception of a configuration update for a child device named `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID`
   of a file `{ path = $PATH, type = $TYPE }` defined in `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml` 
   the `c8y_configuration_plugin` downloads the new configuration content to the temporary directory defined by `tedge config get tmp.path`,
   and, on success, moves this content under the thin-edge file transfer HTTP root.
   * The file is moved to `$TEDGE_HTTP_ROOT/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_update/$TYPE`
     making this file available under `http://$TEDGE_HTTP/tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_update/$TYPE`.
   * Note that the `$TYPE` is by default the `$PATH` if not provided by the configuration.  
1. Once the updated configuration is available over the local HTTP file transfer service,
   the `c8y_configuration_plugin` notifies the child device by publishing an MQTT message.
   * The topic is `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/req/config_update`
   * The payload is a JSON record with 3 fields
     * `"url": "http://$TEDGE_HTTP/tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_update/$TYPE"`
     * `"path": "$PATH"`

>      * `"type": "$TYPE"` (if no `type` has been specified, then this field is omitted)

Author: I prefer to have the type in the payload rather that in the topic. This is more aligned with what we have with software management.

> 1. On reception of a configuration update on the topic `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/req/config_update`,

Author: I prefer to have the type in the payload rather that in the topic. This is more aligned with what we have with software management.

   The child-device specific software for configuration management:
   1. `GET`s the content from the `url` specified by the notification message.
   1. Uses the `path` and `type` information to apply the new configuration content.

>       Note that these pieces of information are provided by the child-device specific software itself,

Author: It's better to be systematic with the message payload, not assuming some of the data might be known by the reader.

      and make sense only in the specific context of the device operating system and software.
1. While the configuration update is applied,
   the child-device specific software for configuration management,
   notifies thin-edge over MQTT about the progress of this operation.
   1. These messages are published on the topic

>       `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/res/config_update`

Author: I prefer to have the type in the payload rather that in the topic. This is more aligned with what we have with software management.

>       `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/res/config_update`

Author: The rational for sending the configuration type in the message payload and not the topic is the following one.

Is there a use case where a consumer needs to subscribe only to updates for a specific configuration file?
It's unlikely and most subscribers would have to subscribe to `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/res/config_update/#`, if the type were encoded in the topic.

Furthermore, a type can be a path. Having this type in the topic name would make non-constant the number of levels in the topic.

   1. There is three different payloads to notify the configuration operation started,
      succeed or failed for some reason.
   1. All these payloads are JSON records with 3 required fields:
      * `"status": "$STATUS"` where the status is either "executing", "successful" or "failed"
      * `"path": "$PATH"`
      * `"type": "$TYPE"`
      * `"reason": "$ERROR_MSG"` telling the cause of the error if any.
   1. The child-device configuration software must send at least a success or an error message,
      depending on the success of the `GET` and configuration operations.

>       It should also send an executing message before starting to process the request.

Author: It's a good idea to have this optional. However, it would be tricky to have these messages implicitly sent by the tedge-agent which is not aware in which context are made the HTTP requests.

1. On reception an operation status message,
   the `c8y_configuration_plugin` notifies the cloud accordingly.
   1. When a success or error message is finally received,
      then the configuration plugin cleans up all the temporary resources,
      notably removing the file under `$TEDGE_HTTP_ROOT/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_update/$TYPE`.
   1. If no responses are received from the child devices after 60s,
      then a timeout error is sent to the cloud, and the resources cleaned.
   1. If a notification message is received while none is expected (this might notably arrive after a timeout),
      i.e with a configuration file `type` that doesn't exist under `TEDGE_HTTP_ROOT/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_update/`,
      then this notification message is ignored.

> ### The child device uploads current configurations on request

Author: Updated

    * The topic is `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/req/config_snapshot`
    * The payload is a JSON record with 3 fields
        * `"url": "http://$TEDGE_HTTP/tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_snapshot/$TYPE"`
        * `"path": "$PATH"`
        * `"type": "$TYPE"` (if no `type` has been specified, then this field is omitted) 
    * The `url` conveys the fact the `c8y_configuration_plugin` expects that, on transfer success,
      the file will be stored `$TEDGE_HTTP_ROOT/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_snapshot/$TYPE`.
      Note that when the `$TYPE` is not explicitly defined in `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml`,
      then the `$PATH` is used as the configuration type.
1. On reception of a configuration request on the topic `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/req/config_snapshot`,
   The child-device specific software for configuration management:
   1. Uses the `path` and `type` information to retrieve the requested configuration content.
   Note that these pieces of information are provided by the child-device specific software itself,
   and make sense only in the specific context of the device operating system and software.

>    1. `PUT`s the content to the `url` specified by the request message.

Author: I agree that the former sentence implies that the `PUT` is an HTTP `PUT` request. By I find the wording simpler and clear enough.

1. On reception of an operation status message,
   the `c8y_configuration_plugin` notifies the cloud accordingly.
    1. When a success message is received,
       then the configuration plugin transfers to the cloud the content `PUT` by the child-device
       under `$TEDGE_HTTP_ROOT/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_snapshop/$TYPE` and
       finally removes this file when acknowledged by the cloud.
    1. If no responses are received from the child devices after 60s,
       then a timeout error is sent to the cloud,
       and the `$TEDGE_HTTP_ROOT/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_snapshop/$TYPE` file removed
       (if any has been uploaded but in an unknown state).
    1. If a notification message is received while none is expected for this type of configuration
       (this might notably arrive after a timeout), then this notification message is ignored.
       
### The child device uploads its configuration file list on start and on change

The configuration files for a child device `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID` are defined by
the file `$TEDGE_CONFIG_DIR/c8y/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml`.
The content of this file is provided by the child-device configuration software

> but must be known by the `c8y_configuration_plugin`

Author: No, I meant the plugin needs to known that content.

* A first special case is added to have the `c8y_configuration_plugin` requesting itself
  a snapshot of the configuration for a child device if missing
  (i.e. there is no `c8y-configuration-plugin.toml` for that device)
* A second special case is also required to let the child device be able to send update
  of its `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml` on creation and updates.

1. On reception of a `successful` status message
   related to the `"type": "c8y-configuration-plugin"`,
   received either for download on `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/req/config_update`
   or for upload on `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/req/config_snapshot`.
   1. The `c8y_configuration_plugin` takes a copy of the transferred file
      that is under `$TEDGE_HTTP_ROOT/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_update/c8y-configuration-plugin`
      or `$TEDGE_HTTP_ROOT/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_snapshop/c8y-configuration-plugin`
      (depending on the file has been pushed by the cloud or the child device).
   1. The `c8y_configuration_plugin` puts this copy under
      `$TEDGE_CONFIG_DIR/c8y/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml`,

>       and starts to used it for an updated list of configuration files

Author: updated

      (to which this file `$TEDGE_CONFIG_DIR/c8y/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml`
      is implicitly added with type `c8y-configuration-plugin`).
   1. If the request were triggered by the cloud,
      the `c8y_configuration_plugin` proceeds on processing the `successful` status message,
      notifying the cloud and removing the file `$TEDGE_CONFIG_DIR/c8y/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml`.
      Note that the request might have been triggered by the main device on start,
      or by the child device itself (see below),

>       in that case the cloud most not be notified. 

Author: Fixed

1. On start, the `c8y_configuration_plugin` check for each child device `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID`,
   listed in the directory `$TEDGE_CONFIG_DIR/c8y/`,
   if there is a known `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml`.

>    1. If the configuration is missing for some `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID`

Reviewer 4: Let's send this request even if a config file exists already, just to make sure that it's up-to-date. Let the child device send the most up-to-date config list.

>       (i.e. if the directory `$TEDGE_CONFIG_DIR/c8y/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID` exists

Reviewer 2: Still, I am not sure who creates `$TEDGE_CONFIG_DIR/c8y/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID`. If `--init <child_id>` creates it, this case (the directory exists, but the file doesn't exist) can really occur.

Author: > Still, I am not sure who creates `$TEDGE_CONFIG_DIR/c8y/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID`

I propose here to use `c8y_configuration_plugin --init` for that purpose.

> If `--init <child_id>` creates it, this case (the directory exists, but the file doesn't exist) can really occur.

Yes, this case can occur and the `c8y_configuration_plugin` must be prepared to handle it.

* The directory means that the child device supports configuration management.
* The file `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml` tells the details on how.

Author: Reading this comment from @rina23q + that [other one](https://github.com/thin-edge/thin-edge.io/pull/1417#discussion_r973956217) from @albinsuresh, I wonder that we might come with a simpler solution
that is furthermore closer to what is proposed by @cstoidner for child device provisioning.

* Get rid of my proposal for an extension of the `--init` option that can do only half of the work (i.e declaring support for configuration but not providing the list of configuration files on the child device).
* Get also rid of my proposal to have the `c8y_configuration_plugin` requesting the child device for its list of configuration files if missing on the main device.
* Give the child device agent the responsibility to send its `c8y_configuration_plugin.toml` file on start and on change.
  Receiving this content, the `c8y_configuration_plugin` on the main device will have to:
  1. Declare to the mapper that the child device support configuration management (unless already done).
  2. Copy the child's `c8y_configuration_plugin.toml` under `$TEDGE_CONFIG_DIR/c8y/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID`.

@albinsuresh and @rina23q, what do you think about that?

Reviewer 4: The child device sending all that information to the thin-edge device on startup seems like the right long term solution. But, if we want to go with a simpler short term solution, we could still use this `--init <child-id>` idea. I'd even say that let the init command create an empty `c8y-config-plugin.toml` under `$TEDGE_CONFIG_DIR/c8y/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID`. That way, the config list can even be updated from the cloud, without expecting the child device to upload that.

The main issue with that approach is the need for running this init command on the thin-edge device when a new child device is connected. Many of our customers have explicity stated that they would like a solution where child device can just be plugged-in without having to do anything on the thin-edge device. That's why I was saying that the child device initiating all this might be the better long term solution.

Reviewer 2: I'm happy with the new proposal, `c8y_cofiguration_plugin` creates the directory `$TEDGE_CONFIG_DIR/c8y/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID` on the reception of `c8y-configuration-plugin.toml`.

      but not the file `$TEDGE_CONFIG_DIR/c8y/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml`).
   1. Then the `c8y_configuration_plugin` request this file from the child device
      by sending an MQTT message on the topic `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/req/config_snapshot`.
   1. The payload of this message is a JSON record with 2 required fields:
       * `"url": "http://$TEDGE_HTTP/tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_snapshot/c8y-configuration-plugin"`
       * `"type": "c8y-configuration-plugin"`    

> 1. The child-device configuration software has nothing specific to do on requests

Reviewer 4: I don't understand why you've written that statement that the child device "has nothing specific to do on requests for `"type": "c8y-configuration-plugin"`. They have to respond, right? For example, when the `config_snasphot` for this type is requested, the child device is expected to upload a TOML file in the prescribed format with the config list in it, right? Similarly, on a `config_update` request, the child device is supposed to update its own internal config list in whatever format that they maintain it in (may or may not be our prescribed TOML format)?

Author: What I meant is that the child-device behaves exactly as for any other snapshot request.

   that are related to the `"type": "c8y-configuration-plugin"`.
   However, on start and on local changes of the list of configuration files,
   The child-device configuration software should push to the thin-edge device
   this new or updated content. This is done as a regular snapshot request.
      1. `PUT`s the content of updated `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml`
         to the `http://$TEDGE_HTTP/tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/config_snapshot/c8y-configuration-plugin`.
      1. On success of the upload, the child-device configuration software
         notifies the `c8y_configuration_plugin` with an MQTT message published on the topic
         `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/res/config_snapshot`
      1. The payload is a JSON record with 2 required fields:
        * `"status": "successful"`
        * `"type": "c8y-configuration-plugin"`
      1. Note that there is no need to send error or executing notification messages here,

>          since this is a spontaneous operation.

Reviewer 4: This section talks about the handling of "config list" for a child device during the startup of the plugin. How the config list of a new child device added dynamically, while the plugin is already running is not explicitly specified, but I'm assuming this is how it works.

1. When the new child device is added, the user run `c8y-config-plugin --init <CHILD_DEVICE_ID>` command which creates the directory `/etc/tedge/c8y/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID` for that child.
2. The inotify mechanism of the plugin detects the creation of this new directory for the new child device and initiates the config_snapshot request for `"type": "c8y-configuration-plugin"` as described above.

@didier-wenzek Could you please confirm if that's what you had in mind to handle dynamic addition of child devices?

Author: I was not mindfully thinking to that scenario but these are indeed a correct consequence of what has been written.

That said, I'm not happy with this complex dance with a mix of manual operation, inotify and MQTT.

@albinsuresh, @rina23q and @initard : I think we need to consider to simplify these initialization steps with the child device sending its `c8y-configuration-plugin.toml` file on start.

Author: The initialization steps have been simplified with the child device sending its c8y-configuration-plugin.toml file on start.

## Configuration protocol between thin-edge and the child-devices

The configuration plugin `c8y_configuration_plugin` can act as a proxy between the cloud and a child-device.
However, for that to work, a client, referred to as child-device-agent, must be installed on the child device
to perform the actual configuration updates pushed by thin-edge on behalf of the cloud.
While the configuration plugin tells what need to be updated and when,
only the child device specific client can control where and how these updates can be applied.

* The responsibility of the configuration plugin is to
  * interact with the cloud, receiving the configuration update and configuration snapshot requests,

>   * download/upload configuration files from/to the cloud to be exchaged with the child device

Author: Typo: "exchaged" should be "exchanged".

Author: Fixed

For each kind of child device such a specific client has to be implemented
and installed on the child-device hardware (To be precise, most often on the child device,

> but not necessarily as, for a child device with closed software that cannot be altered,

Author: Being closed-source might one of the reason preventing the software to be updated, but another might simply be that a specific version of the software has been certified on the child-device hardware after a costly process.

Here is the protocol that has to be implemented by the child-device configuration client.
This protocol covers 4 interactions, the child devices:
1. Connecting to thin-edge
2. Downloading configuration file updates from thin-edge
3. Uploading current configuration files to thin-edge

> 4. Notifying the list of configuration files to thin-edge

Reviewer 4: Aah nice. I didn't know that. I've always wished for a flexible numbering system in markdown without having to explicitly write numbers. I guess this trick is the solution for that.

       
### The child device uploads its configuration file list on start and on change

The configuration files for a child device `$CHILD_DEVICE_ID` are defined in
the file `$TEDGE_CONFIG_DIR/c8y/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/c8y-configuration-plugin.toml` on the thin-edge device.
But, the content of this file must be provided by the child-device agent
by uploading a `c8y-configuration-plugin.toml` with `"type": "c8y-configuration-plugin"` in its prescribed format.

> The child-device can upload this file on its startup,

Author: If the child-device fails to send upload its own configuration then configuration management will never be enabled for it.  Keep the `--init $CHILD` option, as a work around, would not be enough since the the child-device configuration file list must be sent in any case.

```suggestion
The child-device must upload this file on its startup as well as when updated,
```

Reviewer 4: With that *can* instead of *must* I was trying to stress that the child-device agent can upload this config list **at any point** which **need not necessarily be during the startup** (although startup is one logical place to do so). But now I see how it might be interpreted as an optional step by a reader. Sending this list at some point is a must. So, I'll update that statement as you suggested.

      3. On success of the upload, the child-device agent
         notifies the `c8y_configuration_plugin` with an MQTT message published on the topic
         `tedge/$CHILD_DEVICE_ID/commands/res/config_snapshot`
         with the payload containing a JSON record with `"type": "c8y-configuration-plugin"` but without the `status` field.
      4. Note that there is no need to send executing notification messages here,
         since this is a spontaneous operation and not triggered by an explicit config snapshot request.

> 2. The plugin does the following on recept of the response with `"type": "c8y-configuration-plugin"`,

Author: ```suggestion
2. The plugin does the following on receipt of the response with `"type": "c8y-configuration-plugin"`,
```
